# 3.4. Continuation传递风格 

As we discussed in the preceding section, a continuation waits for the value of each expression. In particular, a continuation is associated with each procedure call. When one procedure invokes another via a nontail call, the called procedure receives an implicit continuation that is responsible for completing what is left of the calling procedure's body plus returning to the calling procedure's continuation. If the call is a tail call, the called procedure simply receives the continuation of the calling procedure.

正如我们在上一节所讨论的那样，continuation等待每一个表达式的值。特别是，每一个过程调用都对应有一个continuation。当一个过程以非尾调用的方式调用另一个过程时，被调用的过程会收到一个隐含的continuation，该continuation来负责完成调用过程剩下部分的工作，并把结果返回给调用过程的continuation。如果是尾调用，被调用的过程只是简单的接收调用过程的continuation。

We can make the continuations explicit by encapsulating "what to do" in an explicit procedural argument passed along on each call. For example, the continuation of the call to f in

我们可以为每个调用，显示的创建continuation用以说明要做什么，并把它作为参数显示的传递给这个调用。例如：下面关于f的continuation

    (letrec ([f (lambda (x) (cons 'a x))]
             [g (lambda (x) (cons 'b (f x)))]
             [h (lambda (x) (g (cons 'c x)))])
         (cons 'd (h '()))) => (d b a c)

conses the symbol b onto the value returned to it, then returns the result of this cons to the continuation of the call to g. This continuation is the same as the continuation of the call to h, which conses the symbol d onto the value returned to it. We can rewrite this in continuation-passing style, or CPS, by replacing these implicit continuations with explicit procedures.

f的continuation将符号b cons到f 的返回值中，然后再将cons后的结果返回给g的continuation。g的continuation和h的continuation是同一个，它把符号d cons到返回给它的值中。我们可以通过continuation传递风格(continuation-passing style简称CPS)，来重写这一过程，用显示的过程来替换这些隐式的continuation。

    (letrec ([f (lambda (x k) (k (cons 'a x)))]
             [g (lambda (x k)
                  (f x (lambda (v) (k (cons 'b v)))))]
             [h (lambda (x k) (g (cons 'c x) k))])
      (h '() (lambda (v) (cons 'd v))))

Like the implicit continuation of h and g in the preceding example, the explicit continuation passed to h and on to g,

    (lambda (v) (cons 'd v))

conses the symbol d onto the value passed to it. Similarly, the continuation passed to f,

    (lambda (v) (k (cons 'b v)))

conses b onto the value passed to it, then passes this on to the continuation of g.

Expressions written in CPS are more complicated, of course, but this style of programming has some useful applications. CPS allows a procedure to pass more than one result to its continuation, because the procedure that implements the continuation can take any number of arguments.

(define car&cdr
  (lambda (p k)
    (k (car p) (cdr p)))) 

(car&cdr '(a b c)
  (lambda (x y)
    (list y x))) => ((b c) a)
(car&cdr '(a b c) cons) => (a b c)
(car&cdr '(a b c a d) memv) => (a d)

(This can be done with multiple values as well; see Section 5.8.) CPS also allows a procedure to take separate "success" and "failure" continuations, which may accept different numbers of arguments. An example is integer-divide below, which passes the quotient and remainder of its first two arguments to its third, unless the second argument (the divisor) is zero, in which case it passes an error message to its fourth argument.

(define integer-divide
  (lambda (x y success failure)
    (if (= y 0)
        (failure "divide by zero")
        (let ([q (quotient x y)])
          (success q (- x (* q y))))))) 

(integer-divide 10 3 list (lambda (x) x)) => (3 1)
(integer-divide 10 0 list (lambda (x) x)) => "divide by zero"

The procedure quotient, employed by integer-divide, returns the quotient of its two arguments, truncated toward zero.

Explicit success and failure continuations can sometimes help to avoid the extra communication necessary to separate successful execution of a procedure from unsuccessful execution. Furthermore, it is possible to have multiple success or failure continuations for different flavors of success or failure, each possibly taking different numbers and types of arguments. See Sections 12.10 and 12.11 for extended examples that employ continuation-passing style.

At this point you might be wondering about the relationship between CPS and the continuations captured via call/cc. It turns out that any program that uses call/cc can be rewritten in CPS without call/cc, but a total rewrite of the program (sometimes including even system-defined primitives) might be necessary. Try to convert the product example on page 75 into CPS before looking at the version below.

(define product
  (lambda (ls k)
    (let ([break k])
      (let f ([ls ls] [k k])
        (cond
          [(null? ls) (k 1)]
          [(= (car ls) 0) (break 0)]
          [else (f (cdr ls)
                   (lambda (x)
                     (k (* (car ls) x))))])))))

(product '(1 2 3 4 5) (lambda (x) x)) => 120
(product '(7 3 8 0 1 9 5) (lambda (x) x)) => 0

Exercise 3.4.1

Rewrite the reciprocal example first given in Section 2.1 to accept both success and failure continuations, like integer-divide above.
Exercise 3.4.2

Rewrite the retry example from page 75 to use CPS.
Exercise 3.4.3

Rewrite the following expression in CPS to avoid using call/cc.
(define reciprocals
  (lambda (ls)
    (call/cc
      (lambda (k)
        (map (lambda (x)
               (if (= x 0)
                   (k "zero found")
                   (/ 1 x)))
             ls)))))

(reciprocals '(2 1/3 5 1/4)) => (1/2 3 1/5 4)
(reciprocals '(2 1/3 0 5 1/4)) => "zero found"

[Hint: A single-list version of map is defined on page 46.]
